# A Business Case for Standards in eTRIKS

**IMI eTRIKS project<sup>[1](#myfootnote1)</sup>** has released a set of documents aimed at project leaders and data managers alike to provide guidance and recommendations as to which standardization efforts may be relevant to them. The work carried out by eTRIKS is meant to be made available to all IMI projects<sup>[2](#myfootnote2)</sup> to raise awareness as well as to gain input from specific fields of translational research  and further development and refinement of data standards. Furthermore, eTRIKS aims to provide regular updates and releases, to incorporate additions and follow-ups on technology evolution and progress in standardization initiatives. eTRIKS information feeds (mailing list, website) will be used to relay these updates.

Data standards play an important role in managing and handling research data. On the one hand, regulatory agencies are increasingly mandating data standards for the submission of clinical research data and data sharing <sup>[3](#myfootnote3)</sup>-<sup>[4](#myfootnote4)</sup>  . On the other hand, data standards encourage the use of integrated metadata, which provides a solid foundation for systematically discovering, retrieving, understanding, integrating, disseminating, exchanging and reusing research data.

Annotation resources such as MIAME guidelines<sup>[5](#myfootnote5)</sup> or controlled vocabularies such as the Gene Ontology<sup>[6](#myfootnote6)</sup>  have become essential resources in modern molecular biology and computational biology. By defining how information is structured and what information is reported, standards, such as CDISC<sup>[7](#myfootnote7)</sup> or ISA<sup>[8](#myfootnote8)</sup>, make it easier to access, distribute, disseminate and exchange information. They also allow scientific scrutiny to be exerted, a central activity in the life of scientists. There should be no barrier to data assessment and all stakeholders of the scientific endeavour must embrace efforts aiming at enhancing access to information so it can be efficiently mined, analyzed and exploited. 	

To understand the impact of the standardization process, one should consider the roadmap set out by the European Medicines Agency for implementing a series of ISO Standards for the identification of medicinal products. The process is now widely known as the IDMP<sup>[9](#myfootnote9)</sup>. It is an extremely significant milestone in standardization process as, starting from July 2016, Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) No 520/2012External link icon (articles 25 and 26) obliges Member States, marketing-authorisation holders and EMA to make use of the terminologies defined in ISO IDMP standards.  In practice, this means that submission to EMA, will be made using the HL7 SPL format based on the ISO IDMP standards, ISO IDMP technical specifications and HL7 common product model, a combination of standardization tools designed to supercede the eXtended EudraVigilance Product Report Message (XEVPRM) format.

Standards are developed to ensure scientific information is represented **consistently**, **efficiently** and **meaningfully** to the benefit of the community. It is expected that scientists and science stakeholders will have greater confidence when standard compliant datasets are available, ensuring data analysis and reuse in the longer term are made more straightforward.  With the use of standards the analysis of aggregated study data becomes much more reliable and effective giving maximum opportunities for medical advances and new knowledge to come to light.
More broadly, the very low data comparability and reproducibility is a big issue in Life Science, and this results in wasting significant amounts of resources in organizations worldwide, and, consequently, impairs/slows down the scientific research and the development of new drugs and biomarkers for patients. The lack of adequate reporting standards adversely affects the overall quality of available data. Therefore efforts in standardization of data, metadata and experimental/clinical reports in Life Science <sup>[10](#myfootnote10)</sup> represent significant endeavour at rectifying this issue.
With the present document, IMI eTRIKS aims to bring about endorsement of the **FAIR principles** for data, that is to make data **‘Findable, Accessible, Interoperable and Reusable’**, as outlined by the Force 11 group<sup>[11](#myfootnote11)</sup>. These principles are being adopted by a growing number of stakeholders, from publishers (e.g.  [NPG Scientific Data](http://www.nature.com/sdata/about/principles), to Funders and Repositories (e.g. Dryad<sup>[12](#myfootnote12)</sup>, Figshare<sup>[13](#myfootnote13)</sup>) to support data publication.

Finally, The entire set fo eTRIKS recommended resources can be accessed in a browseable, searcheable form from the Biosharing catalogue of standards and resources from [FAIRsharing](https://biosharing.org/collection/5?q=.).